Stephen William Hawking was born on January 8, 1942, in Oxford, England, exactly 300 years after the death of Galileo. He grew up in a family of eccentric thinkers in St Albans. He attended University College, Oxford, where he studied physics and chemistry, describing his time there as ridiculously easy, calculating he spent about a thousand hours studying over three years.

After Oxford, he went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, for his graduate work in cosmology. In 1963, at age 21, he was diagnosed with an early-onset, slow-progressing form of motor neurone disease (ALS). Doctors gave him two years to live. The diagnosis plunged him into a depression, but his engagement to Jane Wilde gave him "something to live for." He survived for 55 years after his diagnosis.

He married Jane Wilde in 1965, and they had three children: Robert, Lucy, and Timothy. As his physical condition declined, Jane cared for him and their children. They divorced in 1995. Hawking then married his nurse, Elaine Mason, in 1995. They divorced in 2007.

Hawking lost his ability to write, so he developed compensatory visual methods, visualizing equations geometrically. In 1985, he caught pneumonia and had to have a tracheotomy, which permanently removed his ability to speak. He then used a computer program called Equalizer, controlling a speech synthesizer using a hand switch, and later, when he lost hand movement, by twitching his cheek muscle, detected by an infrared sensor on his glasses. He chose the "Perfect Paul" voice (created by MIT engineer Dennis Klatt) and kept it for the rest of his life, stating it had become his trademark voice. His speech rate eventually slowed to about one word per minute.

Hawking held the Lucasian Professorship of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge from 1979 to 2009. This is one of the most prestigious academic posts in the world, previously held by Isaac Newton and Paul Dirac.

He died peacefully at his home in Cambridge on March 14, 2018, at the age of 76 (which happened to be Albert Einstein's birthday and Pi Day). His ashes were interred in the nave of Westminster Abbey in London, between the graves of Sir Isaac Newton and Charles Darwin.

During his lifetime he received numerous awards, including the Albert Einstein Award, the Wolf Prize, the Copley Medal, the Fundamental Physics Prize, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States. He declined a knighthood in protest over UK science funding.
