Stephen Hawking was famous for making formal scientific wagers with his colleagues. It was a distinctive mannerism and a way for him to engage playfully with theoretical physics debates while acknowledging uncertainty.

The Cygnus X-1 Bet (1974):
Hawking bet Kip Thorne that the astronomical object Cygnus X-1 did NOT contain a black hole. This was effectively an "insurance policy" for Hawking; he had done so much work on black holes that if they turned out not to exist, the bet would be his consolation prize. By 1990, observational evidence was overwhelming that it was a black hole. Hawking conceded the bet. The prize? A one-year subscription to Penthouse magazine for Thorne, much to the chagrin of Thorne's wife. Hawking paid up.

The Information Paradox Bet (1997):
Hawking and Kip Thorne made a bet with John Preskill regarding the black hole information paradox. Hawking and Thorne argued that since black holes evaporate (via Hawking radiation), the information about what fell into them is permanently lost, which would mean quantum mechanics is flawed (unitarity is violated). Preskill argued that information must be preserved and released in some scrambled form, meaning general relativity must be modified. 

In 2004, at a conference in Dublin, Hawking dramatically conceded the bet. He presented new calculations showing that black hole horizons fluctuate and leak information back out. The prize was "an encyclopedia of the winner's choice, from which information can be retrieved at will." Since Preskill was an American baseball fan, Hawking paid him with a copy of "Total Baseball: The Ultimate Baseball Encyclopedia," though Hawking joked he should have given him the ashes of an encyclopedia to represent how scrambled the information would be.

The Higgs Boson Bet:
Before the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) began operations, Hawking placed a $100 bet with Gordon Kane that the LHC would NOT find the Higgs boson. He argued it would be more exciting for physics if they didn't find it, because it would mean the Standard Model was wrong and they had to think again. When the Higgs boson was discovered in 2012, Hawking lost the bet and paid up, while also stating that Peter Higgs should receive the Nobel Prize (which he subsequently did).
